# High Performance Computing

This repo consists of algorithms implemented as a part of university course 'CEC16 - High Performance Computing'.

It contains programs based on various concepts and tools:

1. Process management
2. Interprocess communication
    1. Shared Memory - OpenMP, multiprocess, pthreads
    2. Message Passing - MPI
3. Producer Consumer Problem
4. Bounded Buffer Problem
5. Collision Vector and MAL
6. Parallel Sum
7. Parallel Prefix Sum
8. Parallel Matrix Multiplication
9. Odd Even Transposition sort
10. Bitonic Sort
11. Batchers Merge Sort

## List of Assignments
_________________

### Assignment 1
_________________
Use vi editor/gedit, gcc compiler, makefile (optional) and gdb debugger in developing these programs.

1. Create and handle Processes in Linux operating system. Make use of fork, sleep, wait, exit, getpid, getppid system calls and ps, kill Linux commands. 

2. Design and implement a simple, interactive shell program that prompts the user for a command, parses the command, and then executes it with a child process by looking at PATH environment variable.  Implement running of command in background also. Properly handle Ctrl-c, Ctrl-d signals.


### Assignment 2
_________________
Learn to use
1. system calls for implementing Shared Memory: ftok, shmget, shmat, shmdt, shmctl.
2. semaphore related system calls: semget, semctl, semop

#### Producer Consumer Problem: 

Write program to provide solution for problem having the following detailed specification: Suppose one process, a producer, is generating information that a second process, a consumer, is using. They communicate by a single shared integer variable. The producer generates a random number, write into the shared variable. The consumer reads the data from shared variable and prints it. We want producer and consumer to cooperate in such a manner that data written to shared variable is neither lost (producer overwrites a number which consumer has not read) nor duplicated (consumer reads the same number again).

1. **Multiple Processes Based Solution:** Write three programs: Controller Process, Producer Process, and Consumer Process. They’ll communicate using System V IPC: Shared Memory and Semaphore. 

    * Controller Process: It will create a shared memory, create required number of semaphores, initialize them properly and will sleep. While it is sleeping, we will run our producer and consumer processes in two separate terminal windows to observe their operation. When it comes out of sleep, it removes the created shared memory and semaphores.

    * Producer Process: It uses the shared memory, and semaphores created by controller process. It does its job as specified above.

    * Consumer Process: It uses the shared memory, and semaphores created by controller process. It does its job as specified above.

2. **Multiple Thread Based Solution:** Write a program that provides the solution using two POSIX threads: producer and consumer. Main thread (function) will create and initialize POSIX mutex and semaphore. Then it will create two posix thread: producer and consumer and waits for the two threads to terminate. Before terminating, Main thread will remove the mutex and semaphore created by it in the beginning. The program will have two functions: producer function implementing the functionality defined for producer and consumer function implementing the functionality defined for consumer. Producer thread executes producer function and consumer thread executed consumer function.


#### Bounded Buffer Problem: 

We have a producer process and a consumer process that are cooperating through a shared buffer. Buffer has limited space of length N. The buffer temporarily stores the values generated by producer until removed by the consumer. Solution to this problem should satisfy the following conditions:

* no “items” are read from an empty buffer;
* data items are read only once;
* data items are not overwritten before they are read;
* items are consumed in the order they are produced; and
* all items produced are eventually consumed.


Verify that your solution satisfy the properties of Mutual Exclusion, Absence of Deadlock, Absence of Unnecessary Delay and Eventual Entry. Use binary semaphores as synchronisation primitives.


### Assignment 3
_________________

Develop a C/C++/Java/Python/R program to find Minimal Average Latency for a given reservation table. Reservation Table is available in a text file. The name of text file is to be read as a command line argument. It can be of variable size. Number of stages of the pipelined system is decided by the number of rows in the reservation table and number of clock cycles needed for one instance of task execution is decided by number of columns of the reservation table. A row will have an entry as x if some stage is being used in some clock cycle and - if that stage is not being used. The different entries of x and - in a row are separated by , 

Your program will display following on different lines as output:
1) Forbidden Latencies:
2) Permissible Latencies:
3) Collision Vector:
4) Textual representation of collision state diagram: (Hint: Say starting node is N1. It has 3 immediate child nodes N2, N3, N4.Further, N2 has 2 nodes namely N5, N6. You will show it as: 
 N1->N2, N3, N4
 N2->N5, N6 ..........................and so on.
5) List of Simple Cycles with node numbers and latencies:
6) List of Greedy Cycles with node numbers and latencies:
7) Minimal Average Latency: 

### Assignment 4
_________________
Parallel Algorithm Implementation Using Threads
Use pthreads with C/C++  or Threads in Java or Threads in Python

1. Given an array of integers, write a parallel program to find out the sum of the array. Assume the entire array is stored initially in one location.

2. Write a program to perform a Parallel Matrix Multiplication. The goal is to multiply an MxN matrix called A by an NxP matrix called B and store the result into the MxP matrix called C.



### Assignment 5
_________________
Implement Odd Even Transposition Sort using Multiple Threads


### Assignment 6
_________________
Parallel Programming through Message Passing Interface (MPI) using C

Given an array of integers, write a parallel program using MPI to find out the sum of the array. Assume the entire array is stored initially in one location

Help Resources:

* Installing MPICH2 on a Single Machine : http://mpitutorial.com/tutorials/installing-mpich2/ 

* MPI Hello World : http://mpitutorial.com/tutorials/mpi-hello-world/ 

* An Introduction to the MPI using C : http://condor.cc.ku.edu/~grobe/docs/intro-MPI-C.shtml



### Assignment 7
_________________
Write programs making use of OpenMP directives (to have parallel processing) that 

1.  Compute the sum of all the elements in an array A (in C/C++)
2.  Finds the largest number in an array A. 

Help Resources:

* Parallel Programming with OpenMP: http://www.cse.iitm.ac.in/~rupesh/teaching/hpc/jun16/4-openmp.pdf 

* Introduction to OpenMP: https://www3.nd.edu/~zxu2/acms60212-40212/Lec-12-OpenMP.pdf 


### Assignment 8
_________________
Implement Bitonic Sort using Shared memory (OpenMP) and pthreads

Help Resources:

* https://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~venugopa/parallel_summer2012/bitonic_overview.html 



### Assignment 9
_________________
Implement Batchers Odd Even Merge Sort using using two different styles of parallel programming - Shared memory (OpenMP) and Message Passing (MPI).


### Assignment 10
_________________

Implement Parallel Prefix Sum using two different styles of parallel programming - Shared memory (OpenMP) and Message Passing (MPI). 

Given a sequence of numbers x1, x2, ..., xn, the prefix sums are the partial sums
```
      s1 = x1 
      s2 = x1 + x2
        ...
      sn = x1 + x2 + ... + xn
```

* You should write two programs to compute the prefix sums - one in shared memory (OpenMP) and one in message passing (MPI).

* Your program should be able to use a variable, user-specified, number of processors. For example, the user should be able to run the program using any number of processors / processes between 1 and 16. The number of processors can either be selected using a command line argument.

* Your program should be able to sum a variable, user-specified, number of integers. The integers in the input sequence should be randomly generated inside your program. (That is, the user will input n, and the program will then randomly generate n numbers.)

* Your program should print output  to a file the prefix sums computed. It should also print out the original input.
